1. Weight gain can occur as a side effect of some beta blockers, especially the older ones, such as atenolol (Tenormin) and metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol-XL). The average weight gain is no more than 4 pounds (about 2 kilograms).

2. Newer beta blockers, such as carvedilol (Coreg), don't usually cause weight gain as a side effect. Weight may rise in the first weeks of taking the beta blocker and then generally stabilizes.

3. However, the beta blockers that can cause weight gain usually aren't prescribed unless other medications haven't worked, or if you have a specific heart condition that requires taking those medications.

(source: http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/high-blood-pressure/expert-answers/beta-blockers/faq-20058385)



1. The cause of beta-blocker-associated weight gain is not definitively known, but it may revolve around lower metabolic rate, fluid retention and lessened physical activity. Studies have revealed that beta blockers cause a reduction in energy expenditure of four to nine percent, which rises to 12 percent in obese hypertensive persons.

2. According to the AHA, beta-blockers can cause fat to accumulate in the abdominal region. Patients taking older types of beta blockers, in particular atenolol and metoprolol, gain two to four pounds on average. Most of the weight gain comes during the early months of beta locker treatment. Patients of all demographic groups appear to be equally likely to gain weight.

3. Another disturbing trend recently associated with beta blockers is a 28 percent increase in risk of Type II diabetes, for which weight gain is always a concern.

4. However, since metabolic processing of food decreases with age, younger people may be more at risk than older ones.

(source: http://www.livestrong.com/article/18413-beta-blockers-weight-gain-side/)



Drugs for: High blood pressure, coronary artery disease

Could Cause Weight Gain: Powerful beta-blockers such as metoprolol (Lopressor), atenolol (Tenormin)

Skinny Alternative: Mixed alphaand betablockers such as carvedilol (Coreg)

Our Expert Says: With the single-effect beta-blockers, it can be harder to lose weight, possibly because they reduce metabolic rate.

(source: http://www.rd.com/health/conditions/gaining-weight-maybe-its-your-medicine/)



1. A regression analysis suggested that β-blockers were associated with an initial weight gain during the first few months. Thereafter, no further weight gain compared with controls was apparent.

2. The median difference in weight between the β-blocker and control groups was 1.2 kg (range −0.4 to 3.5 kg).

3. However, a weighted regression analysis (Figure 3⇓) showed that β-blocker consumption was associated with an initial weight gain in the first few months. Thereafter, no further weight gain, compared with controls, was apparent.

4. Instead, an energy expenditure reduction unaccompanied by an energy intake reduction will result in weight gain until the positive energy balance is neutralized by the increased metabolic demand of increased tissue mass.

(source: http://hyper.ahajournals.org/content/37/2/250.full)



####### Drugs associated with weight gain #######
1. Paxil (paroxetine)
(one of the SSRIs, can switch to weight-neutral SSRI such as Prozac or Zoloft)
2. Prozac (fluoxetine)
(one of the SSRIs, can cause weight gain in the long-term, can switch to Wellbutrin (bupropion))
3. Remeron (mirtazapine)
(one of the antidepressants)
4. Elavil, Endep, Vanatrip (amitriptyline)
(Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs))
5. Diabinese, Insulase (chlorpropamide), Actos and Prandin
(one of the Type II diabetes drug)
6. Insulin
7. Tenormin (atenolol)
(Beta-blockers are among the go-to drugs for high blood pressure, but the older ones, such as Tenormin, Lopressor (metoprolol), and Inderal (propranolol), can expand the waistline.
Newer beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and ACE inhibitors are less likely to cause weight gain, Dr. Cheskin says.)
... (others omitted)
